orca_wheeler_taos.md, before:

## Using Orca on Wheeler and Taos

### Submitting an Orca script on Wheeler

Wheeler uses PBS (__P__ortable __B__atch __S__ystem) to submit jobs to the queue for execution. Below is an example script that can be used on Wheeler named `orca_submission.pbs`:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/bash

## Setup your qsub flags here requesting resources.
#PBS -l walltime=10:00:00
#PBS -l nodes=1:ppn=8
#PBS -N my_orca_job

## Change to the submission directory 
## and load the Orca software module
cd $PBS_O_WORKDIR
module load orca/4.0.1

## Set your input file for Orca
files=my_orca_input.inp

# Orca needs the full path when running in parallel
full_orca_path=$(which orca)

# Run Orca
$full_orca_path $files
```

Now you can simply submit your Orca job to the queue with `qsub orca_submission.pbs`. 


### Submitting on Orca script on Taos

Taos uses Slurm (__S__imple __L__inux __U__tility for __R__esource __M__anagement) to submit jobs and manage resources. Slurm provides greater control over resource management and utilization which means one has to be more explicit in their submission script. Specifically, it is necessary to request sufficient memory for your task when submitting your job. Below is a sample script for submitting an Orca job on Taos named `orca_submission.sh`:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/bash

## Set your slurm flags here requesting resources.
#SBATCH --job-name=orca_test
#SBATCH --output=test.out
#SBATCH --ntasks=8
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1
## This depends on which queue you have access to.
#SBATCH --partition=my_partition
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=6GB

## Change to the submission directory 
## and load the Orca software module
cd $SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR
module load openmpi-3.1.5-gcc-5.4.0-f6ikvl6
module load orca/4.2.1

## Set your input file for Orca
files=my_orca_input.inp

# Orca needs the full path when running in parallel
full_orca_path=$(which orca)

# Run Orca
$full_orca_path $files 
```
Now you can simply submit your job to the queue with `sbatch orca_submission.sh`.

Commit message:

Added email, bold, and input name
Added email notifications. I think many users are unaware of that feature.
Bolded text instead of __P__
Changed "files" to "input_file" to be more verbose about its purpose

orca_wheeler_taos.md, after:

## Using Orca on Wheeler and Taos

### Submitting an Orca script on Wheeler

Wheeler uses PBS (**P**ortable **B**atch **S**ystem) to submit jobs to the queue for execution. Below is an example script that can be used on Wheeler named `orca_submission.pbs`:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/bash

## Setup your qsub flags here requesting resources.
#PBS -l walltime=10:00:00
#PBS -l nodes=1:ppn=8
#PBS -N my_orca_job
#PBS -M <YourNetID>@unm.edu
#PBS -m bae

## Change to the submission directory 
## and load the Orca software module
cd $PBS_O_WORKDIR
module load orca/4.0.1

## Set your input file for Orca
input_file=my_orca_input.inp

# Orca needs the full path when running in parallel
full_orca_path=$(which orca)

# Run Orca
$full_orca_path $input_file
```

Now you can simply submit your Orca job to the queue with `qsub orca_submission.pbs`. 


### Submitting on Orca script on Taos

Taos uses Slurm (**S**imple **L**inux **U**tility for **R**esource **M**anagement) to submit jobs and manage resources. Slurm provides greater control over resource management and utilization which means one has to be more explicit in their submission script. Specifically, it is necessary to request sufficient memory for your task when submitting your job. Below is a sample script for submitting an Orca job on Taos named `orca_submission.sh`:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/bash

## Set your slurm flags here requesting resources.
#SBATCH --job-name=orca_test
#SBATCH --output=test.out
#SBATCH --ntasks=8
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1
## This depends on which queue you have access to.
#SBATCH --partition=my_partition
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=6GB
#SBATCH --mail-type=begin        # send email when job begins
#SBATCH --mail-type=end          # send email when job ends
#SBATCH --mail-type=fail         # send email if job fails
#SBATCH --mail-user=<YourNetID>@unm.edu

## Change to the submission directory 
## and load the Orca software module
cd $SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR
module load openmpi-3.1.5-gcc-5.4.0-f6ikvl6
module load orca/4.2.1

## Set your input file for Orca
input_file=my_orca_input.inp

# Orca needs the full path when running in parallel
full_orca_path=$(which orca)

# Run Orca
$full_orca_path $input_file 
```
Now you can simply submit your job to the queue with `sbatch orca_submission.sh`.
